Welcome. In this lesson,
we will build on Dijkstra's
algorithm by introducing
a new potentially faster approach
that we can use for our
mission planning problem.
To do this, we'll leverage
heuristics in our search,
which will help us refine
the search process to
make it more efficient.
By the end of this video,
you should understand the role of
heuristics in graph search and
identify which heuristics are
valid for our mission planning
problem and which are not.
You should also be
able to leverage
heuristics in
our graph search problem,
by using the A* search algorithm,
and recognize how
to apply A* search
to variance of the
mission planning problem
we've discussed so far.
So let's get started.
If you recall from
the last lesson we
introduced Dijkstra's
algorithm to help
us tackle the
mission planning problem
for the case of
a weighted graph edges,
which was more realistic than
our previous unweighted
graph instance because it
let us take into account
variable distances across
different road segments.
However, Dijkstra's
algorithm required us to
search almost all of the edges
present in the graph,
even though only a
few of them were
actually useful for
constructing the optimal path.
Well, this wasn't a problem
for our small example graph.
It will cause issues
when we scale
our problem to
more realistic proportions,
such as a full road
network for a city.
To improve our
efficiency in practice,
we can instead rely on
a search heuristic by using
the A* algorithm to find
our destination rather
than Dijkstra's.
What is a search heuristic?
In this context, a search
heuristic is an estimate of
the remaining cost to reach
the destination vertex from
any given vertex in the graph.
Of course, any heuristic
we use won't be
exact as that would require
knowing the answer to
our search problem already.
Instead, we rely on
the structure of
the problem instance to develop
a reasonable estimate
that is fast to compute.
In our case, the vertices in
the graph correspond
to points in space,
with the edges corresponding
to segments of a road which have
a weight corresponding to
the length of those
road segments.
Therefore a useful estimate
on the cost or length between
any two vertices is
the straight line or Euclidean
distance between them,
as shown here by HOV,
for a given vertex v
and goal t. Therefore,
for any vertex we
encounter in our search,
our estimate for
the remaining cost
to the goal vertex will
just be the Euclidean distance
between that vertex and the goal.
Note that this estimate is always
an underestimate of the true
distance to reach the goal,
since the shortest path between
any two points is
a straight line.
This is an important
requirement for A* search,
and heuristics that satisfy
this requirement are called
admissible heuristics.
As an example calculation,
suppose we have a start
vertex a and a goal
vertex c. Vertex a
corresponds to the 0.0,
and vertex b corresponds to 2.0.
Vertex c in this case
corresponds to 2.2.
Therefore, the Euclidean distance
between a and c is 2.828,
which is our heuristic estimate
of the cost to the goal.
Note that the edge cost between
any two adjacent vertices is not
equal to the distance
between those vertices.
This is because road segments
are not straight line paths,
and in general
the road segment length will
be influenced by
the shape of the road.
Because of the graphs simplicity,
we can see that the actual cost
of the path from a to c is 4.6,
by summing up
the ab and bc edge costs.
As expected, our heuristic
is an underestimate
of the true cost.
Let's use this new heuristic
to better inform
our graph search.
Here, we have the pseudocode
for the A* algorithm.
It's largely the same as
Dijkstra's algorithm,
but it has a few key differences,
which we've highlighted in blue.
Let's look more closely
at the specific changes.
Recall that in
Dijkstra's algorithm,
we push our open vertices onto
a min heap along with
their accumulated
cost from the origin.
The main heap then sorts
the open vertices by their
associated accumulated cost.
The min difference between
Dijkstra's algorithm
and A* is that instead of
using the accumulated cost,
we use the accumulated
cost plus hv,
the heuristic estimated
remaining cost to
the goal vertex as the value
we push onto the min heap.
The min heap then
essentially sorts
the open vertices by
the estimated total
cost to the goal.
In this sense, A* biases
the search towards
vertices that are
likely to be part of
the optimal path according
to our search heuristic.
Since we are storing a heuristic
based total cost
and the min-heap,
we also need to keep track of
the true cost of
each vertex as well,
which we store in
the cost structure.
An interesting thing to note
is that if we take
our heuristic to be
zero for all vertices
which is still
an admissible heuristic,
we then end up with
Dijkstra's algorithm.
As before with
Dijkstra's algorithm,
we will add the origin
to the min heap,
then pop each vertex
off of the heap and
add all adjacent
vertices to the heap,
until we process the goal vertex.
Let's apply the A* algorithm
to our example graph.
Here we have
our road network graph
from the previous lessons,
except now we've added
the actual position
of each vertex.
Note that the figure
is not to scale
and the vertices
are nicely spaced
to make the figure
more legible instead
of being depicted
in Euclidean space.
However, you can see that
the edge length between
any two adjacent vertices are at
least as long as
their Euclidean distance.
As always, the first vertex
we add to the min heap
is the origin
s. There is zero accumulated cost
and the Euclidean
distance between s and t,
which is a lower bound on
our shortest path
distance is 4.472.
So we add vertex s
with cost 4.472.
Next, we process the first node s
and add the adjacent vertices a,
b, and c to the min heap.
Remember that we need to
add the accumulated cost to
the heuristic cost to the goal
when adding each vertex
to the min heap.
Thus for vertex a,
we have a cost of 5 plus 3 is 8.
For vertex b, we have
a cost of 7 plus 2 is nine,
and for vertex c we
have a cost of 2 plus
the square root of
9 plus 4 is 5.6.
The order of the vertices
in the min heap is now cab.
We also add s as the predecessor
to the vertices a,
b, and c and then add
s to the closed set.
The next vertex to process is c,
which only connects to vertex e.
The cost of e works out to 11.4.
So we now have
a vertex order abe.
We then assign e's predecessor to
be c and add c to the closed set.
Next, we pop a off of the min
heap and we see that it has
outgoing edges to vertex b
and d. The cost to b eight,
which is lower than the
original estimated cost for b.
So we update its cost
in a min heap and
change its predecessor
from s to a.
To show we've updated its cost,
we've highlighted
the edge in purple.
We also add vertex d to
the min heap with cost of seven.
The new heap ordering
is thus dbe.
We then assign a to
be the predecessor of
d and add a to the closed set.
The process continues with d,
which has outgoing edges to e and
t. The estimated cost
of e is 15.4.
Since this is higher than
e's current cost in the min heap,
we ignore this new path
to e and as such we
mark this edge and red.
The estimated cost of t is seven.
Since it is the goal node it has
zero heuristic cost to goal.
After doing this,
the new min heap ordering is t b
e. We set the predecessor of t to
be d and add a to the closed set.
Finally, we process the vertex t
which is the goal
vertex. So we are done.
The final shortest path from s
to t is shown on this graph here,
and we are able to avoid
processing both b and d,
thanks to the A* approach.
Unfortunately, this
example graph is
quite small in order to
demonstrate how
the algorithm works.
However, as we scale
the problem to
much larger graph inputs,
we will see that the heuristic
used in the A* algorithm will
cause it to explore
far fewer vertices than
the Dijkstra's algorithm.
Asymptotically, A* will never
do worse than Dijkstra's,
and in practice A* will result
in a much faster
mission planning process.
Now, in our examples,
we've simplified the
mission planning problems
such that the edge weights or
the distance along
road segments in the map.
However, if we were to include
other factors such as
traffic, speed limits,
or weather into our
mission planning problem,
the road distance along
the path would be too
simplistic to capture
the scope of the problem.
To remedy this, we
can instead take
the estimated time to cross
the road segment as
our edge weights,
and this takes all of
the mentioned factors
into consideration.
However, this renders
our Euclidean distance
metric useless,
as it no longer captures
the true cost to the goal
in terms of time.
To remedy this, we can use
a lower bound estimate of
the time to the goal point
as a Euclidean
distance divided by
the maximum speed allowed
across all road segments.
The car should not
exceed the speed limit.
So even in ideal traffic
and weather conditions,
as well as a straight
line path to the goal,
this is the absolute
shortest amount of
time the car can
travel to that goal.
This means it is a lower bound on
the true cost to
the goal at all times,
and as such it is
an admissible heuristic.
For example, here we have set
our maximum speed to be
a 100 kilometers per hour,
with the edge weights
corresponding to the number
of seconds it takes
to traverse a path.
After computing our heuristic
value of a 101.8 seconds,
we can see that it
is much lower than
the true path length from a to c,
which is a 165.6 seconds.
This is because in general,
this heuristic is a
poor lower bound as
the segments will often take
much longer to traverse,
than the computed minimum.
Poor lower bounds can
degrade the ability
of our heuristic to
guide our search to the goal
for more complex problems,
as compared to
problem instances that
were strictly focused
on minimizing distance.
More advanced methods
are available which
pre-compute additional
values and consider
modified heuristic definitions
that allow large networks
with time-based travel estimates
to be searched efficiently.
We've included some links in
the supplemental material,
if you're interested
in learning more.
In this video, we
introduced the concept of
the Euclidean heuristic
and showed that it was
an admissible heuristic for
our motion planning problem.
We then used it in
our implementation of
A* search for
a motion planning problem.
We also discussed how to modify
the mission planning problem
we've discussed so far,
to include travel times
instead of road lengths,
and also how to modify
our search heuristic to be
admissible in this situation.
Congratulations.
You've reached the end of
this module on mission planning.
In this module, you
learned to define
the mission planning problem as
a shortest path search
over a directed graph,
and you applied Dijkstra's and
A* algorithms to find
the shortest path efficiently.
In the next module,
you'll learn about dynamic
object interactions and how these
relate to the second stage
of our motion planning hierarchy,
the behavioral planner.
See you there.